oxford comma
============

.. slug: oxford-comma
.. date: 2015-08-17 07:26:52 UTC-07:00
.. tags: grammar
.. category:  assignment
.. link:
.. description:
.. type: text


Oxford Comma

Oxford Comma is the final comma in the list of things mentioned in a sentence.
In this statement,

I like computer science, maths, and programming.

The comma after maths and before the conjunction, and, is considered the oxford
comma. Other commonly used terms that refers to this style are serial comma,
series comma, or Harvard comma.

This class emphasizes the use of oxford comma. The exemplar article, given as a
reference for our assignment had review comments on the missing oxford comma. In
my own writing, prior to this essay, I had never added a comma on the final
element before the conjunction. This topic piqued my interest  and I started
doing research on this entity.

The term, Oxford comma, got its name from the Oxford University press style
guide. It was recommended by the Oxford style guide even when many British
journals and publications were not recommending it. In this class, we refer to
it as serial comma. My first conscious encounter of it was during the diagnostic
test. I was not able to correct the sentence by placing a serial comma. I had
never considered a statement, with a list of items, wrong if it did not have a
serial comma. We always try to infer the meaning from the context. But in fact,
as will see shortly, it may not be possible at all times and the reason to
include oxford comma is to reduce ambiguity in the sentence.

The reason we do not notice the lack oxford comma is, the associated press style
guide, which many newspapers follow, does not require us to use oxford comma,
and thus it is often left out.  Let’s notice an ambiguity which is caused by the
lack of oxford comma:

To my parents, Alicia and Steve Jobs.

There is an ambiguity about the writer’s parentage here, because Alicia and
Steve Jobs can be read as in apposition to my parents, leading the reader to
believe that writer claims Alicia and Steve Jobs are the parents.  Whereas
placing the oxford comma after Alicia will completely resolve the ambiguity.

			To my parents, Alicia, and Steve Jobs.


This articulates clearly that the writer is referring to 3 entities in total in
his dedication. There are cases when inclusion of oxford comma can make a
sentence ambiguous too. For example, this statement:

		To my father, Steve Jobs, and Alicia.

The serial comma after my father, creates ambiguity about the writer’s father
because it uses punctuation identical to that used for an appositive phrase,
suggesting that Steve Jobs is the writer father. It is unclear whether there are
3 people (1. my father; 2. Steve jobs; and 3. Alicia) or it is only two (1.
Steve Jobs and 2. Alicia. Steve Jobs is writer’s father). The common way  to
disambiguate this sentence is to refer to each entity as a noun. For e.g.

		To my father, to Steve Jobs, and Alicia.

Thus, the placement of the comma can greatly affect the meaning of the entire
sentence. By properly choosing words and with always using oxford comma, we can
write ambiguous sentences. Also, oxford comma matches with the spoken cadence of
sentences better.


